docs(blog): add DevTools to Agents Playground migration post (#2872)
microsoft/teams-sdk: teams.md/blog/2026-06-04-devtools-to-agents-playground/index.md

---
slug: devtools-to-agents-playground
title: "Switching from DevTools to Microsoft 365 Agents Playground"
date: 2026-06-04
authors:
  - name: Corina Gum
    title: Microsoft
    url: https://github.com/corinagum
    image_url: https://github.com/corinagum.png
tags: [teams-sdk, devtools, agents-playground, local-development]
description: DevTools is being deprecated in favor of Microsoft 365 Agents Playground. Here is what to install, what to remove from your bot, and how your local dev loop changes.
---

> DevTools is being retired across all three Teams SDK languages in favor of Microsoft 365 Agents Playground. It is now obsolete in TypeScript and .NET, and the package has already been removed in Python. If you use DevTools today, here is what to install, what to remove from your bot, and how the local dev loop changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DevTools, a local set of development tools for testing Teams apps without sideloading, is being retired across all three Teams SDK languages in favor of Microsoft 365 Agents Playground. The DevTools integration in code have been marked as obsolete in TypeScript and .NET, and for Python the package has already been removed from PyPI. If you use DevTools today, here is what to install, what to remove from your bot, and how the local dev loop changes.
```

Author: done

---
slug: devtools-to-agents-playground
title: "Switching from DevTools to Microsoft 365 Agents Playground"
date: 2026-06-04
authors:
  - name: Corina Gum
    title: Microsoft
    url: https://github.com/corinagum
    image_url: https://github.com/corinagum.png
tags: [teams-sdk, devtools, agents-playground, local-development]
description: DevTools is being deprecated in favor of Microsoft 365 Agents Playground. Here is what to install, what to remove from your bot, and how your local dev loop changes.
---

> DevTools, a local set of development tools for testing Teams apps without sideloading, is being retired across all three Teams SDK languages in favor of Microsoft 365 Agents Playground. The DevTools integrations in code have been marked as obsolete in TypeScript and .NET, and for Python the package has already been removed from PyPI. If you use DevTools today, here is what to install, what to remove from your bot, and how the local dev loop changes.

Reviewer 2: I think a line on "why" might be helpful. Thoughts?

Reviewer 3: Few things here. 

1. If we force ourselves to explain the decision, it makes it seem like we are defending our position. We should position this as "this is what's best for developers" as that why. 

Thoughts on what we can add: To make the development experience more streamlined, we've decided to adopt Agents Playground as our primary local development tool. This affords developers the robust feature set of Agents Playground while still streamlining being able to test your agent where it truly matters, in Teams. 

Thoughts? @umangsehgal @heyitsaamir @corinagum

Author: \+ @nickwalkmsft

Reviewer: Yes, I agree with the sentiment! I will refrain from volunteering my own specific wording, what Ricky's got or anything along those lines is great.

Reviewer 2: Imo, we should also restate that, our main goal is for users to be able to test directly on Teams, which is the most realistic development environment. And we're investing in tools, like the CLI, to enable developers to start testing there as easily as possible

Author: Thanks everyone for chiming in, added.

<!-- truncate -->

## What changes

- **TypeScript and .NET:** `DevtoolsPlugin` and `AddTeamsDevTools()` are now marked obsolete. They keep working through the grace period and emit a deprecation warning at build time. Removal will happen in a later release, so you can migrate at your own pace.
- **Python:** The `microsoft-teams-devtools` package was deprecated and has already been removed. If you depend on it, move to Playground now.

## What is Microsoft 365 Agents Playground

> Playground is a standalone CLI tool, installed alongside your bot rather than bundled into your project. It opens a chat UI at `http://localhost:56150`, lets you send messages to your bot, mock arbitrary activity types (membership changes, invokes, message reactions), and inspect every HTTP exchange in a log panel.

Reviewer 2: Hm playground isn't a CLI right? It's a web application

Reviewer 4: you are right, it's a web application that can be launched from the CLI (like any other application)

## Migration steps

### TypeScript

Remove the plugin from your `App` constructor:

```diff
- import { DevtoolsPlugin } from '@microsoft/teams.dev';
  import { App } from '@microsoft/teams.apps';

- const app = new App({ plugins: [new DevtoolsPlugin()] });
+ const app = new App();
```

Then remove `@microsoft/teams.dev` from your `package.json`.

### .NET

Remove the call and the project reference:

```diff
- builder.AddTeams().AddTeamsDevTools();
+ builder.AddTeams();
```

Drop the `Microsoft.Teams.Plugins.AspNetCore.DevTools` `ProjectReference` from your `.csproj`.

### Python

Remove the plugin from your `App` and drop `microsoft-teams-devtools` from your dependencies:

```diff
- from microsoft_teams.devtools import DevToolsPlugin
  from microsoft_teams.apps import App

- app = App(plugins=[DevToolsPlugin()])
+ app = App()
```

If you never used the DevTools package, no code change is needed. Just install Playground.

## Run Playground against your bot

Start your bot locally on port `3978`, then in another shell:

```bash

> agentsplayground -e http://localhost:3978/api/messages -c emulator

Reviewer 4: why `-c emulator` ? shouldnt this be `-c msteams` ?

Author: Fixed

```

The UI opens at `http://localhost:56150`. Type a message, your bot replies inline, and the log panel shows the full HTTP round trip.

## Running without credentials

DevTools bypassed authentication implicitly because it ran in-process. Playground sends real HTTP requests, so your bot needs to accept them.

> The easiest path is to leave your AAD credentials unset. Comment out `CLIENT_ID`, `CLIENT_SECRET`, and `TENANT_ID` in `.env` (TypeScript and Python), or omit the equivalents from `appsettings.json` (.NET). The SDK detects there are no credentials and accepts unauthenticated requests, with a startup warning so the mode is explicit:

Reviewer 4: > Comment out `CLIENT_ID`, `CLIENT_SECRET`, and `TENANT_ID` in `.env` 

I dont get it, the `.env` is an opt in when running `tsx|node --env-file` or `dotnet run --lp` 

we can remove the sentence and leave it as " .. credentials unset."

Author: Addressed

```
[WARN] No credentials configured (CLIENT_ID / CLIENT_SECRET / TENANT_ID). Bot will accept unauthenticated requests on /api/messages.
```

> If you want to keep credentials configured (for example, to match a production environment), set the `skipAuth` option instead. In TypeScript that is `new App({ skipAuth: true })`; in Python, `App(skip_auth=True)`; in .NET, `builder.AddTeams(skipAuth: true)`. This option assumes your credentials are real and valid.

Reviewer 4: I disagree with this statement because to match a production environment you should never change `skipAuth` (and I think we should deprecate `skipAuth`).

To test the in/out auth the agents playground can be configured with TenantId/ClientId/ClientSecret and will accept authenticated traffic from the SDK.

Author: Removed reference to skipAuth

## Want to test in Teams directly?

> Playground is the fastest way to iterate locally, but you can also run your agent inside Teams itself. The Teams Developer CLI registers your agent (identity, credentials, and manifest) in a single command, so you can test in the real client instead of an emulator:

Reviewer 2: Could be worth plugging the Agent Skill here too
